- [Narrator] Hi and welcome
back to the programme.
In this video we're going
to look at inheritance.
And as we look at inheritance,
We're also going to look
at a very common question,
which is why would you
want to use class method
or static method.
The first thing I'm going to
do is create a class student,
like we have seen in the
past and there's gonna have
an init method with self, name and school.
And then self.name is gonna be name.
Self.school is gonna be school,
self.marks is gonna be an empty list.
So we know this and I'm also
going to create an average
method which is going to return the self
of sum self.marks divided
by len of self.marks.
And I'm also going to add a third method.
Well I'm actually not gonna add it,
you're gonna add it.
And this method should
return another student
who is in the same school
with a different name.
So basically the method
is gonna be called friend.
And what it should do is
should return a new student
called friend name in
the same school as self.
Give that a go.
Pause the video and think about it
for a few minutes, and try
to implement what this would look like.
It's not a trick question,
just try to do it as
you think you might wanna do this.
You might wanna return a new
student in the same school.
Okay, hopefully you've
managed, and what I'm gonna do
is just say really return,
student, and this student
is gonna be called friend name.
And that's the perimeter.
Friend name then goes into name,
so all we're missing is the school,
it should be self.school.
Right?
Perfect.
So how does this work?
Let's create a student called Anna,
that's gonna be a student called Anna,
and going to Oxford, and then the friend
is gonna be Anna.friend.
And now we only need Greg,
because we can assume
the friend is in the same school.
This may not be true, but nevertheless.
For the example, so.
Friend.name and print friend.school,
and we know what this should give us.
And it does say Greg and Oxford.
Okay, so, very good.
The point of this video
was to cover inheritance.
So, let's do that.
I've created another class
called working student,
but now there's a couple
of brackets at the end,
and inside the brackets we've got student.
What happens here is that
the class working student,
contains all of the stuff
that student contains.
So you can essentially think
of it as a copy and paste.
Okay?
If we type in pass.
As you will be able to see in a moment,
if we say something like cut
this, remove it from there
and put it down here, but
instead of student say
working student, you should
see the same thing printed out.
And you do.
Okay, so think of it as a
copy and paste essentially.
However, when we inherit
things, for example,
when an animal inherits some
traits from the parents,
that does not mean cloning.
It means inheriting, and there
are some differences as well.
And here's the same thing,
so we can reimplement
for example the init method,
with more stuff.
So here, the init method
of a working student
is gonna be name, school and salary.
If we were to copy and paste,
we would do something like this
to assign the properties,
but this is duplicated code really,
it's already in student
and it's already in working
student as well.
Since working student
inherits from student,
we must call students init method.
So this looks rather
confusing, but there's nothing
to be confused about.
What we've got is the super class student.
Student is a super class
because it's the class above.
And then we're gonna call
that class's init method,
which is this one here,
and that is going to set
name, school and marks.
Name, school and marks
here, and then we're
gonna set the salary just
as we would normally.
So think of it again as a copy and paste,
all we're doing really is
calling this init method
which does these things here.
Okay.
So, now, what we can do is
we can print for example,
print, Anna.salary, if
we give her a salary,
such as 20 quid an hour.
Okay, so let's do that.
Let's run this programme.
What do you think is gonna
happen when we run it?
Are we gonna get errors, are
we gonna print things out,
what do you think is gonna happen?
Take a guess.
Hopefully you didn't say an error,
because no error has come out.
What we've received is Anna's salary,
and also the friend's
name and school again.
Now here comes the trick though.
Surely, the friend should
also have a salary.
So what happens when we print that out?
And I'm sure you know by now.
Whether there's a phrase to this
question, but it is a bit of a trick.
But this time we get an attribute error.
An attribute error happens
when we try to access
a property of an object, but that object
does not have the property.
So here we've tried to
access the friend's salary,
but it's telling us that a student object
has no attribute salary.
Wait a minute, Anna was
your working student,
how come Greg is a student?
Well, why not?
That's the way that friend was defined,
so that's still gonna be the case
if we think of it as a copy and paste.
The friend is still
gonna return a student,
it's not gonna return a
working student magically.
So this doesn't really work.
So, this is where you would
use CLS, class method.
If we make the friend
method a class method,
oh again, class method,
then we can remove self,
replacing it by CLS,
CLS remember is a reference to the class
of the thing that is calling it,
so we can replace CLS like that,
and then when we called Anna.friend,
Anna is a working student object,
so CLS is not friend is working student.
Sorry it's not student,
it's working student.
Hopefully that was clear enough.
So now when we copy and
paste this thing down here,
it is a proper copy and paste
and this is a working student.
So when we call this method
from a working student object,
CLS will be working student
and we will return a working student.
But we don't need to
actually copy and paste it,
because when we inherit,
we're in a different type of
student calls it, then we
use the appropriate friend.
However, it cannot be that easy.
So what do you think is gonna happen when
we run this code?
See if you can think exactly
what error is gonna be raised.
Obviously there had to be problems.
We've got self is not defined now.
So we try and accessing self.school
but we couldn't do that.
So what we have to do is now,
the friend doesn't have access to self,
so we cannot take the
school from the object Anna.
We have to have some
sort of origin object.
And then when we do the friend,
we have to do something
like working student.friend.
And the origin is gonna be Anna.
Our object Anna.
And now Anna's gonna be the origin,
Greg is gonna be the friend name,
and we're gonna create a
new student with that name
and that origin's school.
So this is getting
slightly more complicated.
Slightly more complicated.
Let's save that and run it again.
And what do you think is gonna happen now?
I wouldn't really expect
you to be able to guess it.
But, now we have another trace back
and the type error which says
the init method is missing
one required positional argument, salary.
And they would be right,
because working student
is the class, but working
students init method
has three properties that
need to be passed in.
And when we run it here, we're
only passing two properties
in, so we need a third
property there, the salary.
Hmmm.
This is getting complicated.
And after, we probably don't
wanna hard code the salary,
so we'll have to put in the salary here,
and then we'll have to
put in a salary here.
And then when we do the friend,
we'll have to give Greg a salary like so,
and then we can run this
and everything works
and we can even print the
friend's salary there.
And as you can see we get 17.5,
because that's the class,
the object that we created rather.
Now, hopefully that all makes sense.
And what we're going to look
at in the very next video
is a way to simplify this code slightly.
And a way to make it a bit better.
So stick with me and I'll see
you in the very next video,
and we're gonna try to simplify this,
make it a bit nicer,
so that it doesn't grow
more and more complicated
every step of the way.
So I'll see you in the very next video,
and I'll catch you there.